---
title: "Learning to Decode in Parallel: Self-Coordinating Neural Network for Real-Time Quantum Error Correction"
collection: publications
category: preprints
permalink: /publication/2026-01-aquaqubit-preprint
excerpt: 'This paper is about parallel neural network decoder.'
date: 2026-01-14
venue: 'arXiv'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.09921'
bibtexurl: 'https://scholar.googleusercontent.com/scholar.bib?q=info:m2gqZjMCtTQJ:scholar.google.com/&output=citation&scisdr=Cl9MYPLIELfLyxVFnT8:AFtJQiwAAAAAaaBDhT9cT772maj5w50ry0dVbrg&scisig=AFtJQiwAAAAAaaBDhVfEA1SQUI-rhwy-Iw5U9tg&scisf=4&ct=citation&cd=-1&hl=zh-CN'
citation: 'Zhang, K., Yi, Z., Guo, S., Kong, L., Wang, S., Zhan, X., ... & Chen, J. (2026). Learning to Decode in Parallel: Self-Coordinating Neural Network for Real-Time Quantum Error Correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09921.'
---
## Abstract

Fast, reliable decoders are pivotal components for enabling fault-tolerant quantum computation. Neural network decoders like AlphaQubit have demonstrated significant potential, achieving higher accuracy than traditional human-designed decoding algorithms. However, existing implementations of neural network decoders lack the parallelism required to decode the syndrome stream generated by a superconducting logical qubit in real time. Moreover, integrating AlphaQubit with sliding window-based parallel decoding schemes presents non-trivial challenges: AlphaQubit is trained solely to output a single bit corresponding to the global logical correction for an entire memory experiment, rather than local physical corrections that can be easily integrated. We address this issue by training a recurrent, transformer-based neural network specifically tailored for parallel window decoding. While our network still outputs a single bit, we derive training labels from a consistent set of local corrections and train on various types of decoding windows simultaneously. This approach enables the network to self-coordinate across neighboring windows, facilitating high-accuracy parallel decoding of arbitrarily long memory experiments.

As a result, we overcome the throughput bottleneck that previously precluded the use of AlphaQubit-type decoders in fault-tolerant quantum computation. Our work presents the first scalable, neural-network-based parallel decoding framework that simultaneously achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and the stringent throughput required for real-time quantum error correction. Using an end-to-end experimental workflow, we benchmark our decoder on the **Zuchongzhi 3.2** superconducting quantum processor against existing human-designed decoders on surface codes with distances up to $$7$$, demonstrating its superior logical accuracy. Moreover, we demonstrate that, using our approach, a single TPU v6e is capable of decoding surface codes with distances as large as $$25$$ within $$1\mu s$$ per decoding round.
